


                              HOW SNAPMax WORKS


INTRODUCTION
Calculations in SNAPMax start with your inputs, and for each output of
the two hundred or so in a typical output screen, proceed through a long
sequence of calculation steps, finally placing the result in the right
place in the display.  The main menu enables you to set the various input
quantities for the local receiving and remote transmitting stations, but
we will here largely ignore the mechanics of presentation and trace the
program's operation in developing the displayed signal's path, its
strength and finally its edge over the prevailing noise levels.

Calculations start with the sub-routine <geometry>, which establishes a
trigonometric great-circle description of the path. Next <solar> uses this
information to find out where solar energy is actually falling on the
relevant parts of the ionosphere at the time and date of the QSO. Then
<muffr> uses Fricker's code to calculate maximum usable frequency (MUF),
and <propmode> determines the mode (E layer or F layer) likely to prevail.
At this point we call <noise> to retrieve the 1 MHz CCIR noise zone value
and convert it for the frequency in use; <noise> then also finds the
appropriate man-made noise and calculates any galactic noise contribution.
All this information is now pulled together by <hfsignal> and <evaluate>.
The various loss factors are calculated, together with antenna gain, to
give signal strength, and combined with noise results for signal-to-noise
ratios. The <scan> routine determines time and frequency for each call to
this sequence of calculations and then displays the results in map format.

Now it is time to look at the internal workings of these fundamental
sub-routines in turn and see what factors are actually taken into account
in the entire process, and to some extent, how they inter-relate.

PATH CALCULATION
Dedicated sub-routines <countries> and <extract.site> obtain latitude and
longitude of your selected end points from the SNAP.QTH file or from the
screen input.

<geometry> Spherical geometry determines the path; a very tedious process,
but the trigonometrical functions are grist to the computer's mill. The
subroutine <geometry> starts with the latitudes and longitudes that you
input, either from call sign prefixes which SNAPmax looks up, or directly
as geographical co-ordinates. These are converted from degrees to radians
(and back and forth as needed) and used to determine the great circle
distance. SNAPMax then locates the "intermediates"  (or "control points"
as in the CRPL (US NBS) methods) for path evaluation and uses F-layer
altitude from <f.height> to find maximum hop length. Ray elevation angles
and magnetic latitudes are also established for later use.

<f.height> uses in-built maps to determine F-layer heights (displayed in
mode CC) from local time, date and latitude at each intermediate. E-layer
height does not vary greatly and is assumed to be constant at 110 km.


BASIC PARAMETERS
Three main input modules handle the other inputs required for calculation.

<date.time> has the obvious function of setting up the time of day and
period in the seasons for the path. It allows the use of either a date and
time input by the user or the computer's internal date/time.

<flux.freq> asks for the solar flux, (or alternatively sunspot number),
the solar A index, (or alternatively the K index), and the frequency,
whereever this is not forthcoming automatically from a frequency scan.
Most of the screens scan the HF spectrum from 2 - 50 MHz (or from 2 - 12
MHz) automatically, but the Band-opening and Single Calculation screens do
need you to select a frequency.

<sta.param> first requests your selection of transmitter power and a
decision on the receive location noise category (Very Quiet, Quiet Rural,
Suburban, Urban). Then it permits selection of the antennas at both ends
of the route (Three element beam, Dipole, or Vertical) and, except for the
vertical, allows the selection of an installed height up to 300 ft.

<solar> Date and time are used to calculate solar absorption coefficients,
and then absorption factors, using solar zenith angles, allowing for the
high latitude winter anomaly which disturbs the neat pattern of these
events. The sun's ultra-violet radiation ionizes the D, E and F layers,
while other emissions cause such effects as polar auroras. Auroral
activity causes severe attenuation on polar routes, so SNAPmax calculates
probable auroral ring position and depth, based on the local time, solar A
or K index, and historical data. The great circle path is analysed to
determine what proportion lies on the oval, and when and where. The
results modify the D layer absorption coefficient used in the <hfsignal>
sub-routine.


SIGNAL CALCULATION
<muffr> This fairly long routine embodies Fricker's code as previously
mentioned, although somewhat modified. Your inputs first determine local
time at each of the "control points". (To locate these exotic places, run
the program in single calculation CC mode and look at the first display
page.) Required next is the critical frequency which is essentially the
MUF for rays going straight up from the transmitter. F layer height is
used at each control point and a modified "secant law" works out the MUF
for actual ray angles. SNAPmax examines two likely paths so both MUFs are
determined. Lastly, the critical frequency and MUF are modified on the
basis of the prevailing A (or K) factor to allow for the significant
reductions which are associated with the onset of ionospheric storms.

<propmode> is the next call, and this evaluates the positions of the E
layer control points and then the E layer critical frequency and MUF.
These values and data from <muffr> are then used to select the possible
paths. SNAPmax also allows for E layer cut-off, where a usable F layer is
invisible because of intervening E layer ionization. In a simplification
which was thought appropriate, paths with reflection from both E and F
layers are not evaluated. Review showed that these were fairly few and
far between, but it is a limitation which can be borne in mind.

<skipdist> is a very short sub-routine which establishes the minimum
possible F layer hop or skip distance, regardless of the path being
evaluated. This can be seen in the single calculation (CC) display.

<evaluate> calls the signal sub-routines and then compares signal levels
and signal-to-noise ratios to find out which is the controlling path.

<hfsignal> All this information is now pulled together, first to find the
probable received signal level, and then to determine the signal-to-noise
ratio. Received signal strength depends on transmitted power, distance
loss, absorption losses, reflection losses mainly at intermediate earth
points, antenna gains and feeder losses, and over-MUF loss for signals
above the calculated maximum usable frequency. These subroutines,
handling the basic path and a path with one further hop, first look at
signal frequency/MUF ratio, and then calculate the Over-MUF loss and
the probability of an extant path, the classical MUF being the maximum
frequency which is likely to be available 50% of the time. A Weibull error
curve is used, (beta = 3), which appears to correspond well with
actuality. Slant distance is then calculated and used with a modified
version of Rawer's curves to find the "spreading" or distance loss, which
is applied to transmitter power.

Absorptive attenuation (loss in the lowest or D layer) is found from the
absorption factors determined in <solar> using a map based correlation by
George and Bradley. This also allows for gyro-frequency effects in which
free electron resonances absorb signal energy at lower frequencies.
Ionospheric, land and sea reflection losses are added, the land vs sea
decision being made from an internal map.

Losses due to auroral zone activity are combined with the regular D layer
attenuation in the <solar> sub-routine. There is potential for signal gain
due to antipodal focusing, which is included to an optional extent. It
depends on the existence of a relatively smooth undisturbed F layer and
allows for the convergence of all possible great circle paths to your
station from a transmitter at your antipodal point on the other side of
the earth. The <noise> routine is called from here, and signal-to-noise
ratio is worked out, as well as signal strength. Finally, a probable
signal delay is determined, for multipath evaluation. For digital modes,
where there are two possible paths with comparable signal strengths, the
delay is compared with the baud rate, and potentially affected times and
frequencies are flagged.

<gyro> reads gyro-frequencies for the control points from an internal map;
they are used by <signal> in the calculation of absorption loss from the
solar absorption factors.

<noise>, using date and local time for the receiving site, selects
appropriate "noise grades" from tables extracted from CCIR 322 for a large
number of possible operating sites. These were chosen to cover the
countries with the largest amateur populations, and include all of the
USA, Canada and Australia, many European nations, and a selection of other
locations world-wide. If a particular location is not represented, the
necessary data can be entered by anyone with access to the CCIR 322 maps.
As a last resort, a world-wide approximation is provided.

For frequencies below about 3 MHz, a separate sub-routine <mfsignal>
is used to calculate signal strength, and for a range of transition
frequencies an interpolation is used.

This data, for 1 MHz, is adjusted by SNAPMax algorithms for frequency and
bandwidth, interpolated for time and season. Man-made noise is not as well
characterized, but is predicted from CCIR curves, as also is galactic
noise. The man-made noise contribution depends slightly on antenna height;
a minor adjustment is made for the greater immunity of high antennas to
local sources. Galactic noise on the other hand, must pass through the
ionosphere, and there is a low cut-off frequency calculated, related to
the critical frequency.

<snr.bandwidth> provides bandwidth and baud rate for signal quality
calculations.

<antenna.gain> almost always positive, is based on ELNEC analyses of a
dipole, a three-element beam, and a quarter-wave vertical. Comparing
SNAPmax results, band by band, remember that we consider these as quite
large and effective antennas on say 80 meters, and merely rather ordinary
antennas on 15 meters!

Forward gain, often quoted as the maximum for the best lobe, may be
something else entirely at the actual ray angle. Horizontal antenna gain
is modified for antenna height above earth, ground reflection effects
being thereby included.  Nulls in the gain at larger antenna heights are
to some extent filled in by re-radiation etc., so the height factor
adjustment is limited to -25 dB. The vertical antenna is assumed to be at
ground level. All gains are in dBi, relative to a theoretical uniform
radiator, and over earth rather than in free space. Numbers are therefore
larger than the commonly used dBd gains relative to a dipole, and quite a
lot larger than the corresponding free space values. It may be surprising
to find that at some angles a dipole over good ground can show a gain as
great as 8.1 dBi.

Antenna height affects not only antenna gain but also feeder losses, and
these are allowed for, assuming that both stations use RG-8U or similar
coaxial cable.


PATH GAIN EXAMPLE
In a wire circuit from transmitter to receiver, we could just add up all
these losses and gains to get from the transmit level to the receive level
in dBm. In the radio case however, an interesting constant couples
free-space (characteristic resistance 377 ohms) to the antenna, going from
transmitter output in dBm to a free-space signal which is in dB referred
to 1 microvolt/meter. Next the path losses and gains are summed. Another
conversion takes us from a free-space signal to the induced level in an
isotropic receiving antenna, also frequency dependent, and we finally add
receiving antenna gain. The example (14.0 MHz, 24 July 1998, 18:26 GMT,
to run it press XZ in the main menu) shows how it works.  Accuracy to a
tenth of a dB is very certainly NOT implied!! But additional figures do
help in finding one's sources of error. (Add them up and you will find
minor discrepancies of 0.1 dB or so due to rounding!)


    Transmit power 14 MHz        50.7  dBm  (120 watts)
    (Signal at 1 km. = xmit power + xmit antenna gain (7.0 dB) + 74.8)
    Signal at 1 km from xmtr.   132.6  db ref 1uV/m

    Distance loss                91.6  dB
    Absorption loss              42.1  dB
    Auroral zone loss             0.6  dB
    Over-MUF loss                 0.0  dB
    Reflection losses             7.5  dB

    (Recv location sig = sig at 1 km. - total losses)
    Recv. location signal        -9.4  dB ref 1 uV/m
    (Recv sig = recv loc sig + recv ant gain - 20 log F MHz - 77.2)
    Receive Antenna gain          7.0  dB
    Received signal            -102.5  dBm


FURTHER READING
If you would like to know more about any of these calculations, my book
"The FRIENDLY IONOSPHERE", available from Tyndar Press, P.O. Box 236,
Montchanin, 19710 USA provides both details and extensive references.

73 de Crawford MacKeand WA3ZKZ, VP8CMY, ex-G4ARR  19 Sept 2001
